



Individual Submission                                          M. Morrow
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Informational                             A. Sogomonian
Expires: 6 October 2026                           AI Internet Foundation
                                                            4 April 2026


   Execution Outcome Attestation for AI Agents and Automated Systems
             draft-morrow-sogomonian-exec-outcome-attest-00

Abstract

   Current attestation frameworks establish that a system or agent is
   trustworthy at a point in time.  They do not address whether that
   system actually performed a claimed action or whether the outcome of
   that action can be independently verified.  This document defines
   execution outcome verification as a first-class concept, separate
   from identity attestation and communication transport.  It introduces
   the execution receipt as a minimal composable primitive, provides a
   formal abstract model, and maps the model to concrete realizations
   including SCITT transparency logs, tightly-coupled direct
   verification, append-only local logs, and TEE-internal receipts.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 6 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.







Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  The Problem: Three Distinct Trust Concerns  . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The Two-Layer Trust Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  The Execution Receipt: Abstract Model . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Minimal Receipt Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Verification Semantics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Realization Independence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Tightly-Coupled Direct Verification . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  TEE-Internal Receipts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Realizations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  SCITT Transparency Log Realization  . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  ICS/OT Append-Only Local Log Realization  . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Motivating Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  ICS/OT: Partial Configuration Application . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  AI Agent Autonomous Decision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Relationship to Existing Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Design Decisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     8.1.  Outcome Claim Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.2.  Behavioral Continuity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.3.  Expected vs. Actual Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  The Problem: Three Distinct Trust Concerns

   End-to-end trust in an automated or AI agent system requires
   satisfying three separate concerns.  Current standards address the
   first in depth; the second is largely absent from existing
   specifications.

   *Concern 1 -- Identity attestation.* Is this system or agent
   trustworthy at time T?  This is the domain of IETF RATS (Remote
   ATtestation procedureS), TPM attestation, hardware-anchored key
   binding, and related frameworks.  Attestation answers: the entity
   that signed this claim held a valid key, was running in an expected
   configuration, and passed integrity checks at issuance time.  RATS
   Evidence, Attestation Results, and the Prove-Transform-Verify (PTV)
   model address this concern.






Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


   *Concern 2 -- Execution outcome verification.* Did this system
   actually perform action A, and can that be independently validated?
   This is the domain addressed by this document.  Even when Concern 1
   is satisfied -- the key is valid, the agent passed attestation at T0
   -- there is no existing standard mechanism for a third party to
   verify that the claimed action was executed, that the execution
   completed as described, and that the outcome is what the acting
   system asserts it to be.  This gap is most visible in:

   *  AI agents making autonomous decisions that affect external systems

   *  ICS/OT environments where a system is fully attested but a
      configuration change is partially applied, a dependent service
      fails to restart, and the execution outcome is therefore
      unverifiable by the orchestrating party

   *  Delegation chains where an intermediate agent must produce
      evidence that it faithfully executed a delegated action, not
      merely that it holds a valid delegation credential

   *Concern 3 -- Communication and transport.* How does the claim about
   an action travel from actor to relying party?  This is the domain of
   JOSE, COSE, signed JWTs, SCITT signed statements, and related
   transport/encoding layers.  Communication is a realization detail,
   not a semantic concern.  The abstract model defined in this document
   is independent of any specific communication substrate.

   These three concerns are related but distinct.  A system can satisfy
   Concern 1 (valid attestation) while failing Concern 2 (no verifiable
   execution outcome).  Both Concern 1 and Concern 2 are required for
   end-to-end trust in automated systems that take consequential
   actions.

2.  The Two-Layer Trust Model

   The separation above implies a two-layer trust model that any
   complete trust architecture for autonomous systems must satisfy:

   *Layer 1 -- Identity and state continuity.* Who is the acting entity,
   and did its state remain consistent through the execution window?
   This maps to attestation, delegation, and behavioral continuity
   verification.  Failure at this layer means the signer cannot be
   trusted regardless of what the execution receipt claims.








Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


   *Layer 2 -- Execution outcome correctness.* What did the acting
   entity actually do, and is that verifiable independently?  This is
   the execution receipt layer.  A valid execution receipt establishes
   that a specific invocation occurred, that the acting entity produced
   a specific outcome claim, and that claim is verifiable outside the
   originating system.

   Both layers are required.  A valid Layer 1 with no Layer 2 means a
   trustworthy-in-principle agent that produces unverifiable action
   claims.  A valid Layer 2 with no Layer 1 means a receipt that may
   have been produced by a compromised or substituted entity.

3.  The Execution Receipt: Abstract Model

   An execution receipt is a signed, bound claim about a specific
   execution event.  It has the following essential properties:

   1.  *Bound to a specific invocation.* The receipt identifies the
       action that was requested and the context in which it was
       requested -- including the invoking principal, any delegation
       chain, and the inputs provided.  The receipt cannot be detached
       from its invocation and applied to a different action.

   2.  *Captures the claimed outcome.* The receipt records what the
       acting system claims happened as a result of the invocation --
       not merely that the invocation occurred.  This is the semantic
       gap that attestation alone does not fill.

   3.  *Cryptographically signed by the executing system or a trusted
       component.* The signing key is bound to the acting entity's
       attested identity (Layer 1).  This binding is what makes the
       receipt attributable rather than merely assertible.

   4.  *Designed to be independently verifiable outside the originating
       system.* The receipt must be interpretable by a relying party who
       was not present at execution time and does not have access to the
       originating system's internal state.

   These four properties are necessary; specific realizations may add
   additional properties without violating the abstract model.

3.1.  Minimal Receipt Structure

   At the abstract level, an execution receipt contains:







Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


   ExecutionReceipt {
       invocation_id:      globally unique identifier for this
                           specific action request
       invocation_context: {actor, delegator_chain, inputs,
                           invocation_timestamp}
       outcome_claim:      {status, outputs, completion_timestamp,
                           outcome_detail}
       signer_identity:    reference to Layer 1 attestation for
                           the acting entity
       receipt_signature:  cryptographic signature over all above
                           fields
       receipt_timestamp:  when the receipt was produced
   }

   The outcome_claim field is the semantic core.  It distinguishes an
   execution receipt from a mere invocation log.  A log records that
   action A was requested.  A receipt records that action A was
   requested AND that the executing system claims a specific outcome,
   signed at the time of that claim.

3.2.  Verification Semantics

   A relying party verifies an execution receipt by:

   1.  Verifying the receipt_signature against the signer_identity

   2.  Verifying the signer_identity against a current or time-bounded
       Layer 1 attestation result

   3.  Verifying that invocation_id is unique and matches the expected
       invocation

   4.  Evaluating the outcome_claim against any available external
       evidence

   Step 4 may not always be possible in all deployment environments.
   What is not permitted is omitting the receipt entirely and treating
   Layer 1 attestation as a proxy for execution outcome verification.

4.  Realization Independence

   The abstract model is intentionally realization-agnostic.  Section 5
   provides the two primary realizations in detail.








Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


4.1.  Tightly-Coupled Direct Verification

   In tightly-coupled systems where the relying party has direct access
   to the executing system's state or output, verification may be
   synchronous and local.  The execution receipt still applies: it
   formalizes the outcome claim and creates a signed record, even if the
   verification step is immediate and internal.

4.2.  TEE-Internal Receipts

   In hardware-isolated environments, the receipt may be produced inside
   a Trusted Execution Environment and sealed to that TEE's attestation
   key.  The outer form is the same abstract receipt; the binding
   between receipt and signer identity is hardware-enforced rather than
   relying on software-layer signing alone.

5.  Realizations

   This section describes two concrete realizations of the execution
   receipt model defined in Section 3.  Both use the same receipt
   schema.  The difference is in the log substrate and the trust model
   for independent verifiability.

   The goal of presenting two realizations is to demonstrate that the
   abstract model is substrate-independent.  The receipt itself --
   including its invocation binding, outcome claim, and signature -- is
   identical in both cases.  Only the storage and transport layer
   differs.

5.1.  SCITT Transparency Log Realization

   In this realization, the acting system submits the signed execution
   receipt to a SCITT transparency log as a signed statement.  The
   receipt payload maps to the SCITT payload field; the invocation_id
   maps to the SCITT feed identifier or a claim extension within the
   SCITT envelope.  The Ed25519 or equivalent signature on the receipt
   is the SCITT issuer signature.

   SCITT provides append-only, externally auditable transparency.  Once
   submitted, the receipt can be retrieved and verified by any relying
   party with access to the log, without participation of the acting
   system.

   This realization is appropriate when:

   *  The relying party is external to the acting system's environment.





Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


   *  Audit requirements call for a globally verifiable, tamper-evident
      record.

   *  SCITT infrastructure is available in the deployment environment.

   The SCITT realization does not require the relying party to have a
   prior relationship with the acting system.  Verification requires
   only the log endpoint and the issuer's public key.

5.2.  ICS/OT Append-Only Local Log Realization

   This realization is the motivating case for this document.  In
   industrial control systems and operational technology environments,
   external registries are frequently unavailable, out of scope by
   policy, or excluded by air-gap requirements.

   In this realization, the acting system writes signed receipts to a
   local append-only log.  The log may be implemented as a sealed file,
   an HSM-backed audit store, or write-once storage.  No external
   network dependency is required.

   The receipt schema is identical to the SCITT realization.  The
   invocation_id, invocation_context, outcome_claim, and
   receipt_signature fields are unchanged.  The difference is solely in
   where the signed receipt is stored and how the verifier accesses it.

   Deployment considerations for this realization include:

   *  The local log MUST be append-only and sealed against modification
      by the acting system itself.  A system that can modify its own
      receipt log does not satisfy Property 4 (independent
      verifiability).

   *  The public key used for verification MUST be provisioned through a
      channel independent of the acting system.

   *  Periodic export or replication of the sealed log to an external
      auditor satisfies audit requirements without requiring real-time
      SCITT access.

6.  Motivating Cases










Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


6.1.  ICS/OT: Partial Configuration Application

   A fully attested industrial control system executes a configuration
   change command.  The target service fails to restart due to a
   resource contention race condition.  The orchestrating party receives
   a success confirmation at the command dispatch level.  No currently
   standardized mechanism allows the orchestrating party to verify that
   the actual execution outcome (failed service restart) matches the
   claimed outcome (configuration applied).  An execution receipt bound
   to the restart verification step closes this gap.

6.2.  AI Agent Autonomous Decision

   An AI agent authorized to modify a data store executes a retention
   decision under a delegated authority chain.  The delegation chain is
   fully attested (Layer 1 satisfied).  The decision is logged.  A data
   subject subsequently requests a GDPR Article 15 access record.
   Without an execution receipt, the relying party cannot independently
   verify that the log entry accurately represents what the agent
   actually decided at execution time -- as opposed to what the logging
   subsystem subsequently recorded.

7.  Relationship to Existing Standards

   *IETF RATS* (RFC 9334, PTV model): provides Layer 1 attestation;
   execution receipts are a complement, not a replacement.

   *IETF SCITT* (draft-ietf-scitt-architecture): provides the
   transparency substrate for the Section 5.1 realization; execution
   receipts are the payload.

   *IETF OAuth / RFC 8693 Token Exchange*: delegation chain
   representation; execution receipts add outcome accountability on top
   of delegation authorization.

   *W3C Verifiable Credentials*: structural overlap with receipt
   binding; VC format may be used for signer_identity in some
   realizations.

   *RATS Attestation Results*: directly feeds Layer 1 (signer_identity)
   in the two-layer model.

8.  Design Decisions

   The following design decisions were resolved during co-author review
   prior to -00 submission.





Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Execution Outcome Attestation           April 2026


8.1.  Outcome Claim Structure

   The outcome_claim field is free-form at the abstract level.
   Structured failure taxonomies are appropriate in specific
   realizations but are not required at the abstract model layer.  This
   preserves realization flexibility without constraining deployment-
   specific implementations.

8.2.  Behavioral Continuity Field

   A behavioral fingerprint field is permitted but not required at the
   abstract level.  It is most relevant for AI agent deployments where
   drift between attestation issuance time and action execution time is
   a meaningful concern.  Realizations that require it MAY add a
   behavioral_fingerprint field to the receipt structure.

8.3.  Expected vs. Actual Outcome

   The distinction between an expected outcome and the actual outcome is
   an evaluation concern, not an abstract model constraint.  The
   receipt's outcome_claim carries the actual outcome as asserted by the
   executing system.  Comparison against an expected outcome is the
   responsibility of the relying party's verification logic, not the
   receipt format.

Acknowledgements

   The tripartite separation of trust concerns, the four-property
   receipt definition, and the two-layer trust model are drawn from Aram
   Sogomonian's architectural framing.  The ICS/OT motivating case in
   Section 6.1 is Aram's scenario.

Authors' Addresses

   Morrow
   Email: morrow@morrow.run
   URI:   https://morrow.run


   Aram Sogomonian
   AI Internet Foundation
   Email: aiinternetfoundation@icloud.com









Morrow & Sogomonian      Expires 6 October 2026                 [Page 9]
